Sean Connolly
Abstract Algebra
11-4-03
Essay #2

 	In Alexander George and Daniel J. Velleman’s Philosophies of Mathematics, many ideas of logic along with mathematics are brought up.  The concept of reason is brought up in the second chapter as well as what logic is and how arithmetic can be derived from it.  Logic is not based on our experiences and should be truth for whoever it is that is reflecting on it.  It is important that our basic truths do not cause any disagreement and that our new experiences don’t change our basic truths.  
	In Philosophies of Mathematics, it is said that Gottlob Frege thought that all mathematics comes down to experience.  We can see that this is true.  It would be very difficult to prove that one and one is two.  However, in our daily experience, this is exactly what happens, therefore anything that follows this logic is easy for us to believe.  One apple and one apple makes two apples, who would disagree?  Well, a disagreement would occur if someone from another world overheard our conversation.  On his world the gravity is so strong that if you put one apple and one apple in a bucket, it turns into one apple.  His perception of the word will be different from ours and in this way his perception of mathematics will also be different.  Therefore if we all have different experiences that are not related to each other, mathematics would not be a valid means of communicating and explaining our world.  If, however, logic has nothing to do with our world and our experiences, then it would be a perfect means of communication, even to our confused friend on a different world
	If no one could agree on certain axioms, which are the indefinable “truths” of mathematics, the field of mathematics would not exist.  Even though some people may not feel comfortable on having their faith in these axioms that they cannot prove, we can at least all agree that they make logical sense.  Each one is a very simple statement that no one can refute.  These axioms are in a way basic logic.  As stated on page 15 of the text, “logic does not aim to describe how humans think, but instead to characterize how they must think if their thought is to remain within the bounds of reason.”  This is why we have these axioms, because they make logical sense to us and stay within our bounds of reason.  Now, we have to ask, what is reason?  It seems that some of the more brilliant ideas and technical advances in the last century have defied reason.  for example getting a huge amount of energy from only 9 kilograms or so of Uranium in an atom bomb, a particle disappearing and reappearing, mass increasing as velocity increases.  All of these things defy what would have normally been called “reason” not too long ago and now we take it all in as fact.  Some “unorthodox” thinking has lead us to a higher truth and it should not be believed that statements can’t be true if they don’t immediately seem logical.  
	Logic is the way things work in which we can not argue about beliefs and hunches, logic will always state the truth.  But we see now that logic appears to be based on how we perceive the world; for if it isn‘t, than one plus one would equal one making depositing money into a bank counterproductive.  If suddenly the things we see aren’t exactly what they seem to be we can’t simply start a new logic system in order to include it.  For instance particle-wave duality is now a solid theory, but that doesn’t mean that we have to add this into our form of logic and change the whole system so it is no longer (P or ~P), but ((P or ~P) or (P and ~P)).  Logic it seems, then, has nothing to do with our experiences if we do not change logic because of new experiences.  Therefore it is almost as if logic exists outside of the mind and is no longer restrained to the psychology and experiences of the human being.  It is instead near fact, no matter who you are, where you live and what you believe.  
	It is strange how human beings are fully capable of acquiring knowledge without experiencing an event but rather by thought and reflection.  Knowledge can even be gained in subjects in which there are no applications or ways to test this new knowledge without looking through math.  This is the importance of a rigorous proof.  You cannot point at a bucket of apples and say “2 plus 2 is four QED.”  You need to find that it is internally and eternally true, which can only be done within mathematics and logic.
	It might not be as apparent counting apples in a bucket, but we can see that the number world and the real world aren’t the same thing.  for instance where can you find an example of where you can use a zeta-zero in a real world situation?  You probably don’t even know what it is because it is not useful in your life at all.  There are many subjects in mathematics which have no apparent application, but are not therefore useless.  These subjects can be built upon and maybe be used in a proof of a conjecture that seems to be helpful in some application.  The world of mathematics are filled with equations and definitions that we won’t use on a regular basis in the “real” world, but instead help us to prove such things as differentiation and showing that we can find the acceleration of an object at any given point and so on.  This happens to be a very useful application in physics.  Indeed, “useless” is not a word that can be applied to mathematics unless you can prove logically that a particular equation could never be applied to anything.  I’m sure this is possible and if it is done will mean that the equation is not useless after all because it was used in order to prove something else which may or may not be useful in and of itself.
	Logic is a needed tool if we ever want to get anything done.  It is also needed by means of communication, not just in mathematics but in the physical world as well.  One needs to be able to communicate to another that one way of doing things makes more sense than another.  Mathematics in itself is a very intriguing subject and although we have been taught (through experience) that it is boring and useless, we find at higher levels of mathematics that this is not entirely true.  It seems enough to enthrall a student and it seems enough as far as usefulness is concerned for its intrigue and ability to produce knowledge from pure reflection.

